Naropa University
Graduate School of Psychology

PSYC 678
MA: Contemplative Counseling Psychology

Lineages of Understanding: Buddhist and Western Perspectives on 
Well-Being and Disorder (3 credit hours)
Spring, 2015

Teaching Team:
Instructor: 
Uğur Kocataskin, MA, LPC, CAC I
303-520-7233, ukocataskin@naropa.edu
Office hours: Mondays 9:00am – 12:30pm; 1:00pm – 2:20pm. Sign up available at MyNaropa

CSPs:
Claire Chang, MA			cchang@naropa.edu		 303-245-4722
Karin Bustamante, MA		karinbyoga@gmail.com


Office hours with Clinical Support Professionals are by appointment.

Class Time: Mondays: 3:30pm-6:35pm and Saturday, April 11: 8:45am-12:00pm. 
Locations: Virya, Karuna A, B

EReserves Statement: You can access your online sourcebook directly through the ELearning platform of your class. Weekly downloadable readings are located in the Online Sourcebook Tab and links to internet sources are located in the Web Resources. It is the expectation that students will check both tabs weekly to access assigned readings. 
Methods of Instruction: Lecture (40%), group discussion (30%) and experiential exercises (30%). 
Course Description: What do we mean by health? What is psychopathology? This class looks at how the answers to these questions have evolved over the last hundred years (or slightly more) of formalized psychotherapy, while also considering Buddhist perspectives on these fundamental questions. In particular, we will pay attention to the ways in which we conceptualize our experiences in contrast to the raw material of those experiences. The possibility of working with clinical diagnostic categories within a larger contemplative view of “basic goodness” will be considered. Western language and Buddhist language for the processes that mediate the experience of well-being and clear perception are also explored, including the psychoanalytic concepts of transference, countertransference and resistance. In addition to reviewing the history of psychotherapy, we will study the basic conceptual categories of psychopathology as understood from contemporary clinical perspectives including: anxiety, depression, trauma and the impact of sexual abuse and domestic violence, addiction, and personality disorders.

Professional Licensure: Please note that the licensure requirements of state boards and licensing agencies vary from state to state and change over time. Consequently, successful completion of degree requirements does not guarantee that a state board or licensing agency will adopt a graduate’s application for licensure. It is important that learners are aware of their responsibilities regarding licensure and certifications; advisors are available to discuss professional and career matters with learners and graduates. 

Goals and Student Learning Outcomes:

Goal 1: Students will be able to work with the clinical categories of psychopathology within the context of Buddhist understandings of intrinsic health and interdependence.  

Student Learning Outcomes:
	•	Students will be able to discuss the major schools and trends in clinical psychology, their development, and their mutual influence.
	•	Students will be able to identify and discuss the work of the major theoreticians in modern western psychotherapy and the influence of their work.
	•	Students will be able to recognize moments of Brilliant Sanity in the midst of pathology.
	•	Students will identify basic principles of psychopathology, develope their use of language for the processes that supports or distort the experience of well-being and clear perception.
	•	Students will report understanding and appreciation of patterns leading to pathology in their own experience, and practice extending that understanding into maitri toward oneself and compassionate action towards others. 
	•	Students will demonstrate an understanding of the DSM-V and diagnosis.

Goal 2: Students will learn the form of western psychological literature and how to
             communicate in that form.	

Student Learning Outcomes:	
	•	Students will be able to efficiently research psychological literature using on-line databases.
	•	Students will be able to accurately use APA format to write papers.
	•	Students will be able to write a paper in the style of a literature review.

Required texts
On-line sourcebook. To access, go to http://library.naropa.edu/. Password is maitri. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). 	Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Freud, S. (2010). An autobiographical study. Mansfield Centre, CT: Martino Publishing. 
Freud, S. (1990). On the history of the Psycho-Analytic Movement. New York, NY: W. W. 
Norton & Co. 

Supplemental texts (optional)
American Psychological Association (2009). Publication manual of the American psychological association. (6th ed.). Washington, D.C.: Author
Berzoff, J., Flanagan, L., & Hertz, P. (2011). Inside out and outside in: A 
	multicultural approach to psychodynamic clinical theory and practice. New York, NY: Jason Aronson. 
Corsini, R. J., Wedding, D. (2014). Current psychotherapies. Belmont, CA; Brooks/Cole. 

Ladd, P. D., & Churchill, A. (2012). Person-centered diagnosis and treatment in mental health: A model for empowering clients. Philadelphia, PA: Jessica Kingsley. 
Maddux, J. E., & Winstead, B. A. (2012). Psychopathology: Foundations for a contemporary understanding. (3rd. ed.). NY, NY: Routledge. 
Preece, R. (2010). The wisdom of imperfection: The challenge of individuation in Buddhist life. Ithaca, NY: 	Snow Lion.

Course Requirements and grading:
Two Written Assignments (10% each): 20%
Reading Logs: 10%
Journals: 20%
Final Paper: 15%
Final written exam: 10%
Participation: 25%

All written assignments are to be emailed or posted on MyNaropa class portal depending on your group leader’s preference. Assignments are due at the beginning of the class when due. If any problem getting assignments in on time is anticipated, this should be discussed with the instructor at the beginning of the term. Grade will be lowered for unexcused late assignments. 

ASSIGNMENTS
Assignment #1: Due 2/16
The purpose of this assignment is to gain some experience finding periodical psychological literature. 
 
	•	Choose any topic in psychology of interest to you. Go to the Chinook computer terminals in the CU Norlin library or the terminals at Naropa. Find the Psychinfo database. (This can also be done at the Paramita Computer Lab or via the internet on a home computer–ask instructor for help if needed).  Find the topic and note the total number of citations. If the number of citations is over 30, note the number and add an additional key word or qualifier (Narrow or modify the subject–do not use dates, language, etc. as a modifier or change the subject) to reduce the number of citations and make the search more specific. Keep doing this and record your findings until you have fewer than 30 citations. When you have gotten to this point, copy and paste 5 complete citations including abstracts, unless your search narrowed down to less than 5. Turn in this document along with a clear record of all steps you took in completing this assignment. This report should be at least a paragraph long. This assignment does not need to be in APA format. 
	•	Repeat this process completely for another topic, so that you will be handing in two separate searches. 
	•	In choosing the topics, consider areas you feel interested but perhaps not so familiar. 

Assignment #2: Due 3/30
The purpose of this assignment is to trace the development of a line of psychological thought and observe how writers employ previous writers' ideas in the development of their own theses.  

	•	Select any recent article (dated after 2000) on a specific topic in psychology. The topic should be the title of this assignment. You may use an article in the source book if you like. Write a short summary of the article. Do not merely copy the published abstract if included with the article but give the main points in your own words and understanding. The summary should be a minimum of half page and a maximum of on page in length, double-spaced. 

	•	Look in the reference list of the article in step 1 and select a recent paper (dated later than 1990 unless it’s a seminal text; in that case, discuss this with your group leader) cited by the author, which appears to reflect the theme of that article. (Hint:  It is helpful chose an article from a journal, which can be found in the CU or Naropa library). Make a copy of the reference list and highlight the article you chose. Locate this next article, again write a brief summary, and consult its reference list. Repeat the exercise above so that you have a total of 4 articles used. Write your summaries so that the relationship between the 4 articles is evident. Finally, write a short summary (half to one page) of your findings tracing the path of the topic through the 4 articles. Turn in the summaries and the copies of the reference lists either scanned or cut and pasted. This assignment does not have to be in APA format. It is helpful to do this assignment with an eye towards the final paper. (Caution: it is your responsibility to locate all the four articles in full text to be able to read them and to turn in the reference lists. If finding the full text(s) proves to be difficult online, do not merely change the topic or steer away from the topic. Go to Norlin or Allen Ginsberg to locate the articles. This assignment is to practice this process and you might need to give yourself more than a week to locate the full text versions.)  

Final Paper: Due 04/27
This assignment is a literature review discussing any aspect of any theme in psychology. You should cite at least 6 articles, at least 4 of which should not be from the sourcebook. Review each article and write about it in context of your theme. You should start with an introduction and conclude with a summary tying the articles together using APA formatted headings. We will discuss the general form of the literature review in class. The form for this paper should conform to the form presented in the APA publication manual, including introduction, running head, subheadings if needed, conclusion, and citation/reference style. This assignment should be 5-7 pages in length. In selecting the articles, make an attempt to review recent examples of writing in your topic, which is later than 2004. 

Journals:
The journals are two-page double-spaced papers, which will explore your relationship to the material. Please reflect on your personal experience related to the material discussed in class and in the readings. Journals will be graded not on content but by the umber you turned in, however: feedback will be given on how well you are able to bring awareness to your experience and step back and explore your mind with critical thinking. Journals do not need to be in APA format. 

Reading Logs:
For designated weeks, students will post reading responses online, which should not exceed 300 words. Please enter your response on designated weeks in the folder with the appropriate date. To receive credit, response must be posted by midnight on Saturday evening before the class when the log is due. Students then will comment on two posts by classmates by Monday 12:00, noon. The exact posting time will be determined and stamped by Naropa website. Postings stamped after midnight (for example Monday, 0:01 am) will not be counted and there will be no exceptions. 

The reading logs are graded on your: 1) clarity in writing; 2) skill in grounding thoughts and feelings 
with critical thinking in an effort to integrate the reading with your experience; 3) curiosity about and 
understanding of the reading. Critical thinking includes clarity and accuracy in observing, 
articulating, applying, analyzing, comparing, and contrasting among other things. Your responses 
should include a question, provide a statement of clarification, provide a point of view with
rationale, challenge a point of discussion, or make a relationship between one or more points of the 
discussion.

Class Logs:
At the end of each class, students will write on a 5 x 8 card the thoughts and feelings that were evoked by that days’ class. A selection of class and reading logs will be read at the beginning of each class. Students will be expected to have a supply of 5 x 8 cards.

MACP Late Paper policy:
Late papers will be marked down one half grade for each day they are late unless a request has been made and approved by your discussion group leader by no later than noon of the day before papers are due). A half grade is the difference between an "A" and an "A-" or between a "B+" and a "B." "Each day" means each 24-hour period as measured from the time the paper was due.  (E.g., a paper handed two hours after it is due is one day late.  If it is handed in 26 hours after it was due, it is two days late.)  Extensions will be given generally only for significant unforeseen circumstances beyond the student's control, including family and medical emergencies.

Participation (25% of grade) is evaluated based on the following:

Outstanding (A): Student participates actively in most classes, showing respect and attention regarding the contributions of classmates and instructor. Student's participation is insightful, reflecting completion of the reading and contemplation of the major themes. Student's participation advances the discussion and reflects personal engagement with the material. 

Good (B+): Student participates often and is respectful and attentive regarding the contributions of classmates and instructor. Student's participation is insightful, reflecting completion of the reading and contemplation of the major themes. Student's participation reflects personal engagement with the material.

Barely passing (B-): Student participates periodically and with respect and attention regarding the contributions of classmates and instructor. Student's participation indicates that s/he usually completes the reading. Student's participation may be unbalanced in favor of either personal experience or academic material.

Below passing (C or lower): Student rarely participates in class discussions (less than 1/3 of classes) or not at all, student's participation often does not appear to be in dialogue with others or the material, or his/her participation is lacking in respect for other students or instructor. Student's participation often indicates that s/he has not done the assigned reading.


Course Outline

1/12 Class 1: 	Introduction, relationships, and definitions. 

1/19 No class: MLK Day – Reading log #1 and responses due
Required readings:
Maddux, J. E., Gosselin, J. T., & Winstead, B. A. (2012). Conceptions of Psychopathology: A social constructional perspective. In J. E Maddux, & B. A. Winstead (Eds.), Psychopathology: Foundations for a contemporary understanding (pp. 3-22). NY, NY: Routledge. 
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Introduction. In Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 	disorders (5th ed.)(pp. 5-17). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 

1/26 Class 2:	The Contemplative View 
Required readings:
Podvoll, E. (1993). The history of sanity in contemplative psychotherapy. Journal of
       Contemplative Psychotherapy, 2, 11-31.
Trungpa, C. (1983). Creating an environment of sanity. Journal of Contemplative
       Psychotherapy, 8, 1-10. 
Wegela, K. K., & Joseph, A. (1992). Shock, uncertainty and conviction: Gateways between psychopathology and intrinsic health. Journal of Contemplative Psychotherapy, 8, 33-52.
Recommended:
Preece, R. (2010). The noble imperfection. In The wisdom of imperfection: The challenge of individuation in Buddhist life (pp. 57-63). Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Watters, E. (2010, January 8). The Americanization of mental illness. New York Times. 
	Link: http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/10/magazine/10psyche-t.html

02/2 Class 3:	– The art and science of Psychotherapy – Journal #1 due
Required readings:
Dumont, F. (2014). Introduction to 21st-century psychotherapies. In Corsini, R. J., Wedding, D. 	
	(Eds.), Current psychotherapies (pp. 1-17). Belmont, CA; Brooks/Cole. 
Recommended:
Norcross, J. C., Vandenbos, G. R., & Freedheim, D. K. (2011). Chapter 1. In History of psychotherapy: 	
	Continuity and change (pp. 3-38). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.  
Norcross, J. C., Vandenbos, G. R., & Freedheim, D. K. (2011). Chapter 2. In History of psychotherapy: 	
	Continuity and change (pp. 39-62). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.  

02/9 Class 4
Required readings:
Freud, S. (2010). An autobiographical study. Mansfield Centre, CT: Martino Publishing. 
Freud, S. (1990). On the history of the Psycho-Analytic Movement. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Co.
Recommended:
Andrews, B., Brewin, C. R. (2010). What did get Freud right? The Psychologist, 13, 606-607.   

02/16 Class 5:	 Thought lineages in psychology & conflict - Assignment #1 Due
Required readings:  
Adelman, K. (1998). What Freud got right. Washington Magazine
Freud, S. (2010). An autobiographical study. Mansfield Centre, CT: Martino Publishing. 
Freud, S. (1990). On the history of the Psycho-Analytic Movement. New York, NY: W. W. 
Norton & Co. 
Lear, J. (1995). The shrink is in. The New Republic, 26, 18-25.

2/23, 3/2  No Classes:  Maitri II

3/9 Class 6:  Dynamics in the psychotherapeutic relationship
Required readings: 
Ernsberger, C. (1979). The concept of countertransference as a therapeutic instrument: Its early 	
	history. Modern Psychoanalysis, 4, 141-164.
Gelso, C. J., & Bhatia, A. (2012). Crossing Theoretical Lines: The Role and Effect of Transference in          	Nonanalytic Psychotherapies. Psychotherapy, 49, 384-390.			                 Klein, M. (1951). The origins of transference. International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 33, 433-438. 
3/16  Class 7:  Dynamics in the psychotherapeutic relationship – continued – Journal #2 due
Required readings:
Geltner, P. (2000). The evolutionary and developmental origins of patient-induced countertransference. Psychiatry, 63, 253-264.
Geltner, P. (2006). The concept of objective countertransference and its role in a two-person 	psychology. 
	The American Journal of Psychoanalysis, 66, 25-42.
Silverberg, F. R. (1990). Working with resistance. Journal of Contemplative Psychotherapy, 7, 21-34.

Recommended:
Frankfeldt, V. L. (1990). Becoming able to feel hate: The treatment of a psychotic somaticizing patient. Modern Psychoanalysis, 15, 63-78.
Lerner, S., & Lerner, H. E. (1983).  A systemic approach to resistance: Theoretical and technical considerations. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 37, 387-399. 
Murray, J. F. (1995). On objects, transference, and two-person psychology: A critique of the new 	seduction theory. Psychoanalytic psychology, 12(1), 31-41
3/23  No Class: Spring Break

3/30  Class 8:  Intro to theories – components – how to compare, contrast, and integrate - Client centered therapies - Assignment #2 Due
Required readings: 
Blatt, S. J. (2013). The patient’s contribution to the therapeutic process: A Rogerian-psychodynamic perspective. Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, 30, 139-166.
Njoku, M. G. C., PhD. (2013). Shared therapeutic components of some psychotherapy models. Ife Psychologia, 21(3), 152-156. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com/docview/1439812915?accountid=34899
Recommended:
Vinton, E. A. (2008). Finding a voice of one's own: The development of a unique, authentic manner as retrospectively reported by highly experienced relational psychoanalysts. (Order No. 3303073, Massachusetts School of Professional Psychology). ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, 123-n/a. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com/docview/304806268?accountid=34899. (304806268).

4/6  Class 9: Existential Therapy - Reading log #2 due

Required readings: 
Yalom, I. D., & Josselson, R. (2014). Existential Psychotherapy. In Corsini, R. J., Wedding, D. 	
	(Eds.), Current psychotherapies (pp. 265-298). Belmont, CA; Brooks/Cole. 
Craig, E. (2009). Tao, dasein, and psyche: Shared grounds for depth psychotherapy. In L. Hoffman, 	M. Yang, F. J. Kaklauskas, & A. Chan (Eds.), Existential psychology east-west (pp. 111–148). 	Colorado Springs, CO: University of the Rockies Press.
Recommended: 											                                Bugental, J.F.T., & Bracke, P. E. (1992). The future of existential-humanistic psychotherapy. 	Psychotherapy, 29, 28-33.
4/11  Class 10: Behaviorism, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy and other salient modalities
Required readings:
Bannink, F. P. (2007). Solution-focused brief therapy. Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 37, 87-94. 
Beck, J.S., & Sussman, C. (2006). In session with Judith S. Beck, PhD: Cognitive-behavioral therapy. Primary Psychiatry, 13, 31-34
Dewane, C. (2008). The ABCs of ACT--Acceptance and Commitment Therapy. Social Work Today, 36.
Hunt, The Cognitivists

Recommended:
Freud, S. (2002). Advice to doctors on psychoanalytic treatment. In A. Phillips (Ed.) & A. Bance (Trans.), Wild Analysis (pp. 32-41). London: Penguin Books.
Germer, C. (2005). Mindfulness: What is it? What does it matter? In C. K. Germer, R. D. Siegel, & P. R. Fulton (Eds.), Mindfulness and psychotherapy (pp. 3-27). New York, NY: Guilford.
Hayes, S. C. (2004). Acceptance and commitment therapy and the new behavior therapies: 
	Mindfulness, acceptance, and relationship. In Mindfulness and Acceptance: Expanding the 
	cognitive-behavioral tradition (pp. 1-29). New York, NY: Guilford. 

04/13  Class 11: Common problems: Anxiety, Depression– Journal #3 due
Readings:
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Depressive disorders. In Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.) (155-189). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Anxiety disorders. In Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.) (189-235). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Trungpa, C. (1984). Fear and Fearlessness. In Shambhala: The Sacred path of the warrior (pp. 33-37). Boston: Shambhala.
Recommended:
Cozolino, L. J. (2002). The anxious and fearful brain. In The neuroscience of psychotherapy: Building and rebuilding the human brain (pp. 235-256). New York: W. W. Norton.
Kahn, M. (2002). Anxiety. In Basic Freud: Psychoanalytic thought for the 21st century (pp. 105-120). New York: Basic Books. 
Moore, T. (1992). Gifts of depression. In Care Of The Soul, (pp. 137-154). New York, NY: 
	Harper.
Thompson, T. (1995). The beast: A reckoning with depression. (pp. 3-14). New York, NY: 
	Putnam and Sons.
Welwood, J. (1987). Depression as a loss of heart. Journal of Contemplative Psychotherapy, 4, 123-133.
Wilson, K. G. & Duferne, T. (2010). Anxiety: Form, function and the utility of suffering. In Things might go terribly, horribly wrong: A guide to life liberated from anxiety (pp. 17-49). Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications.

04/20 Class 12:  Trauma and Abuse: Psychological, Neurobiological and Societal Aspects – Journal 	#4 
		due
Required readings:
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Trauma- and stressor-related disorders. In Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.) (265-291). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Cozolino, L. J. (2002). Interpersonal trauma. In The neuroscience of human relationships: Attachment and the developing social brain (pp. 229-240). W. W. Norton: New York. 
Johnson, S. (2008). Healing traumatic wounds: The power of love. In Hold me tight: Seven conversations for a lifetime of love (pp. 233-251). New York: Little, Brown and Co.
Nhat Hanh, T. (1992). Please call me by my true names. In Peace is every step: The path of Mindfulness in everyday life (pp. 121-126). New York: Bantam. 

Recommended:
Kumin, I. (1996). Trauma and enactments. In Pre-object relatedness: Early attachment and the psychoanalytic  
     situation (pp. 180-191). Guilford: New York. 
Perry, B. (2006). For your own good. In The boy who was raised as a dog: and other stories from a child psychiatrist’s notebook: What traumatized children can teach us about loss, love and healing (pp. 31-56). New York: Basic Books. 
Van der Kolk, B. (2003). Post-traumatic stress disorder and the nature of trauma. In Healing trauma: Attachment, mind, body, and brain. (pp. 168-195). New York: W. W. Norton.
Van der Kolk, B. (2001). In terror’s grip: Healing the ravages of trauma. Cerebrum, 4, pp. 34-50.   
       NewYork: The Dana Foundation.

04/27 Class 13:  Common problems: Bipolar, substance abuse/dependency - Final Paper Due
Required readings:
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Bipolar and related disorders. In Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.) (123-155). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Patton, P. (1994). A contemplative view of addiction as experienced by a recovering alcoholic. Journal of Contemplative Psychotherapy, 9, 113-134.

Recommended:
Denning, P., Little, J., & Glickman, A. (2004). Addiction: Is it all or nothing? In Over the influence: The harm reduction guide to managing drugs and alcohol (pp. 1-21). New York: Guilford. 
May, G. (1988). Desire: Addiction and human freedom. In Addiction and grace: Love and spirituality in the healing of addictions (pp. 1-21). New York: HarperCollins.
Miller, W., & Rollnick, S.  (1991) The atmosphere of change. In Motivational interviewing: Preparing people to change addictive behavior (pp.14-29). New York: Guilford Press.
Papp, P. (1983). The Dilemma of change. In The process of change (pp. 6-16). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

05/04 Class 14: Personality disorders – In-class written final exam
Required readings:
Ladd, P. D., & Churchill, A. (2012). Borderline personality disorder. In Person-centered diagnosis and treatment in mental health: A model for empowering clients (pp. 56-75). Philadelphia, PA: Jessica Kingsley. 
Presnall, J. R., & Widiger, T. A. (2012). Personality disorders. In J. E Maddux, & B. A. Winstead (Eds.), Psychopathology: Foundations for a contemporary understanding (pp. 3-22). NY, NY: Routledge. 
Stone, M. H. (2012). Disorder in the domain of the personality disorders. Psychodynamic psychiatry, 	40(1), 23-46.								               
Recommended:										    Brisch, K. H. (2002). Attachment theory and its basic concepts. In Treating attachment disorders: From 	theory to therapy. (pp. 7-53). New York: Guilford.  						      Cori, J. L. (2010). Attachment: our first foundation. In The emotionally absent mother: A guide to self-	healing and getting the love you missed (pp. 42-62). New York: The Experiment.		     Wallin, D. (2007). Attachment and change. In Attachment in Psychotherapy (pp. 1-8). New York: 	Guilford Press.
Attendance and Lateness Policies:  Students are allowed one absence from the class to be taken at their own discretion.  In the event that a student takes more than the allowed absence, it is up to the instructor to determine 1) if it is possible to make up the work missed, and 2) if so, what work the student must do. If it is not possible to make up the missed work, your grade will be lowered by a half grade. A half grade is the difference between an “A” and an “A-” or between a “B+” and a “B.” This policy is meant to assure that all students engage with the course material fully. 

Being absent from class a total of more than 5% of the class period (9 minutes) either at the beginning, middle, or end of class will be marked as a partial absence. Two instances of partial absence equal a full absence. 

Whether an absence is excused or unexcused, students are responsible to obtain and/or make up all the missed material and information shared in class when they are late or absent. 

Incomplete: The grade of I/F (incomplete) is only available in extreme circumstances of illness or family emergency late in the semester. Barring such circumstances, work not completed by the end of the term will receive a score of zero and will be figured into your grade total as a zero.
Learning disabilities and Special needs: 
If you have any special needs that may require accommodations or if you will miss a class because of a religious holiday, please contact the instructor by the third week of class.

Accommodations for Disabilities: Naropa University will provide  accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. To request an accommodation, or to discuss any learning needs you may have, contact the Disability Resources Coordinator. Her office is located in the Student Affairs Department in the Administration Building on the Arapahoe Campus. You may contact her at 303-245-4749 or email: jchavarria@naropa.edu. 
Other Needs:  If you have any other needs that may require accommodations (special arrangements) or if you will miss a class because of a religious holiday, please contact the instructors by the third week of class

Changes to the syllabus: The instructor reserves the right to make changes to the syllabus. If significant changes are made, a new syllabus will be issued according to Naropa University guidelines. If there is a topic not shown on the syllabus that you are eager to discuss, please let the instructor know and we can talk about how to address that material.

Other: Recording this class is not permitted except by specific permission of the instructors.  As adults, students will decide for themselves when to leave the classroom to go to the restroom.  If you intend to leave class early please let the instructor know. Due to the large group community nature of this class and to maintain confidentiality, guests are allowed only during certain parts of this class. Guest visits need to be cleared with the instructor three days prior to the class meeting. Animals are not allowed in the classroom under any circumstances. Please see the Naropa Code of Prohibited Conduct for further guidelines. 






